The Joe Rogan.
Experience. Your Instagram is hilarious by the way, Instagram it's very,
excuse me. I don't have, Twitter' have Instagram, your Twitter. Okay.
I get them confused. Sometimes your Twitter feed is really good. It's,
it's both insightful, but also very funny.
Yeah. I try to play both sides, but the problem is like, you know, I think,
I think today they're is a bit of a, um, if you're,
if you're a girl and you're, you're kind of funny, there,
there's a bit of a sense that like, people are really taking that seriously.
So I've been told to tone down on, on jokes. Who's telling you that. Well,
I'm also, you know, I run, I run a major nonprofit organization and,
and you wanna, tellbody.
What it is or keep it on the low. Uh.
<Laugh> no, it's a, it's, it's a really well, it's kind of right up your alley,
you know, it's, it's a organization that,
that really tries to promote pluralistic thinking, um, and, and, you know,
basically exporting ideas to part of the world that it's often censored
and, and you have narratives that are just not, um, you know,
not exposed to people are not to the middle east. So, you know,
we, we thought, you know, we spent like what,
$8 trillion on the war in terror and what was the results, right. Like we, we,
we marched in and said, okay, we're gonna bring freedom and democracy to people.
But if there were no cultural institutions to kind of nudge people
to, to understand why they should value freedom and D see,
is it really a surprise that it failed to take root there? So that's what,
you know, we basically, we call, uh,
the organizations call ideas beyond borders, and it's kind of self explanatory.
You know, we basically take, um, acquire the rights to books, um,
that are not available there, translate them into Arabic, um,
for free. And then we just like load it up on the library site.
Anyone can basically access that and download it. Um, and we do Wikipedia too.
So like 10% of all Wikipedia is in Arabic of English Wikipedia.
Mm. And, uh, so we basically try to, you know, like for example,
George Orwell doesn't exist in Arabic. Right. So like, if you look it up,
would you even understand what the word or will it means, right.
Yeah. So how did you get involved in this?
Um, my co-founder is, uh, Iraqi refugee and he grew up on desedam and, uh,
it's it's, I, I met him when I was in grad school
and I was really compelled by what he was talking about, you know, just like,
uh, somebody who grew up in Singapore too.
We don't really have freedom of speech. Right. So, um,
the issue was that like, for me, I, I just felt like growing up.
Um, I was not, I was kind of like, all right, you know what my issue is that,
like, there was no, uh, freedom of, of thought freedom of speech in Singapore,
the government just kind of controls everything.
I just think it's part of the human spirit. You know,
that if you say you can't have something, yes. We'll just,
there's an old Arabic proverb that, which is prohibited is always wanted. Yeah.
And, and whatever you, you kind of like, you just drive it underground if you,
if you try to ban it. So it's the whole spirit of,
of punk rock of like F to the system. And that just lies in almost, you know,
every human heart. We actually see that with, um, our books, for example, um,
you know,
a lot of books are actually like you transmitted on these telegram groups in
Arabic. Mm. Um, looks like that Sam Harris w rights, um, you know,
Richard Dawkins, um, these kinds of, uh,
ideas that are really super censored in, in, in the middle east. So you,
you know, that's kind of the, the, the gap that we're trying to plug right now,
it's that, um, since books are not available in that language. Mm it's.
I think there's this crazy statistic,
more books are translated between English and Spanish in one year than English
and Arabic in a thousand years. Wow. It's kind of crazy.
That is kind of crazy. So the exposure to those ideas. Yeah, exactly. Yeah.
Right. And the only other option is get these people to learn English,
which is a far more difficult task. Of.
Course, of course. And, and, you know, your, your average part in living in say,
Syrian refugee camp, isn't going to learn that quickly. Right.
You gotta meet people where they are. Right. So I think the statistic,
when we first started, 10% of English, Wikipedia was actually in Arabic,
which means that every time, like, for example, let's say, you're like, oh,
Jamie, go Google this it. And, and, and you expect an answer. It's just,
it's just at the tip of a fingertips. It's so it's so baked into modern life.
Now we don't even like, think twice about it.
But imagine if like you live in, I don't know,
say Saudi Arabia and like, okay, let's just Google it 10 out,
out of every 10 times, one time, there's no answer because,
uh, the page doesn't exist or, you know, it just, the word, uh,
feminism doesn't exist in Arabic.
So you can't look it up or secularism doesn't exist. It's kind of it's.
How do you expect people to, to, to kind of break out of their,
of their mindset of, of their indoctrination. Mm. You know, and it's, it's not,
we're, we're not saying like, this is a top down thing.
Like you have to read this it's that I just wanna live in a world where being
ignorant is a choice for everyonehmm. Cause, cuz it's a choice for us. Like,
let's say like, you know, right now you're like dumb and just,
just like basically you spend your nights watching the bachelor or like,
you know, whatever it is. It's like, I know some people I do too.
I do too. But uh, I know I'm judging, but I know, oh, it's.
Listen. It's they also are into interesting things.
But I know some people do consume mindless nonsense, my friend cam,
but exclusive bachelorette. He does, I'm calling you out cam you's shaing him.
Yeah. You know, you know, you watch that.
Which one? The female one bachelorette. He watch both of them. Oh God,
<laugh> I only know that's still going on because I'm at the checkout line and
the supermarket I'm like.
Why is that there? Like,
it's so strange that people are even interested in that. I know. I know it's a,
it's a weird thing. Very weird thing. Um, yes,
that ignorance would be a choice would be nice if right. Yeah. So,
so what you're saying is that these part, parts of the world,
one of the problems of getting them to shift their perception of the world is
that they're not exposed to all the great works.
They're not exposed to the different ideas, different ideas and different,
different debates.
And they have a monoculture. So monoculture because of, you know, society is,
they have religions, they have ways of life that are just so deeply entrenched.
Right. Um, and then you also have a really, really heavy censorship,
both from your authoritarian government and also from your religion.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> um, you know, the, the first word, for example,
the first word in the Quran is actually read really, but the,
they really mean just read this one thing. Mm. And, uh, you know, just the,
the sort of like habits of a free mind are not really cultivated. Um,
and also when you're taught, I mean, growing up,
not to question things and in part I understand because, um,
I think when you grow up in an Asian household with like, you know,
tiger parents there's sense of like, you don't question my authority, you know?
So it, it permeates culture from a very, very young age. And imagine like,
if you kind of grow up in that environment,
you're going to internalize all those things. And that's why it, it kind of,
you know, it, it follows you over time. So when you were in school,
you're taught no questions. This just, yeah. It's not what I hear, where it is.
Like, there's no such thing as a stupid question, Chad, there are in Asia,
like there's there stupid.
Questions over here too.
But you're told, you're at least told that.
We're giving Chad a break mm-hmm <affirmative>. Yeah. But I, I,
I understand what you're saying,
and that must be really interesting for you to go from this one fairly
restrictive environment to a fairly old open environment. Correct. And did,
did that shift that happened in you and being exposed to all these different
ideas,
did that spark this desire to help other people sort of expand their,
their, their ideas and what they're exposed to? Yeah, because.
Well, I felt like a fish outta water.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> growing up in Singapore. I was always the person that like,
the teachers had to call, like, you know,
your daughters at asking too many questions, she's disrupting the class. What.
Kind of questions?
I don't know. I went to Sunday school too. I was like,
I was that kid who was just like, uh, you know, excuse me, but why,
why do the dinosaurs, uh, why isn't the Bible that the dinosaurs and, and,
and human beings walked, you know, basically like days apart when,
like we know from science that, you know, it was male,
millions of years and fossils. And did they get mad at you? Of course,
of course. Yeah. No. They were like, just keep her out of,
we just rather her not come to Sunday school. Really? Yeah, yeah.
No, no answers. There was no one that tried to like sort it through and say,
listen, must be that God was, uh, testing people.
And, uh, this is why.
That's what my mom would say really. But in class, I it's just, you know,
it's how there's no, uh, there's no culture of dialectics of,
of having dialogue mm-hmm <affirmative> and,
and refining your positions it's that it comes from authority, right.
This is a very confusion culture. So it's like, well, I am your teacher.
So it is the way it is. Right. And okay, that's one level of it.
And if you say, grow up in the middle east, asking a question could be death,
right. If you, if you even remotely like say and Saudi Arabia,
especially remotely reveal that you might be having atheistic thoughts,
that's death. So it's like, we're talking a,
about different scales and degrees of censorship and consequences for that. And,
uh, I think when I met my co-founder faceal, you know, I was like, okay, I,
I guess I have, I, I had issues with the country I grew up in,
but for him it was,
he ended up almost being killed by Al Qaeda for just like starting a blog,
talking about, you know, the importance of secularism and, and, uh,
counter violent extremism. Really. Yeah. That's how he came here as a refugee.
So I'm like, oh. Maybe they.
Are, you know, how did he almost get killed by Alqaeda?
Uh, well, cuz uh, when, when the us invadta Baghdad, I mean,
he was living in, in Baghdad at the time. Um, and uh,
Al Qaeda took over his neighborhood once there was a void, I almost aousted.
Right. And, uh, he was kind of like, you know,
roaming around and like telling kind of telling the youth army certain things
like, okay, you know, like this is where Alqaeda is. Uh, this is a cell. My,
my friend here has been like radicalized Mmhmm and uh,
Al kinda knew they put him on a, on a hit list, you know,
because he was not sympathetic to their cause. And uh,
so he ended up on a death list. His brother was killed,
just horrible story. Bridget actually recently interviewed him on,
on harm podcast. And, and I get the sense that like, oh,
like the consequence of saying what you think there is like,
at least in my case was just like, Hey,
maybe I might go to jail right in Singapore. But,
but in Iraq it was death.
And I think it's hard for people in America to really grasp what
that environment must be like,
because we're so accustomed to this idea of freedom of speech
and it's SOS ingrained too. Yes. It's so ingrained. Yeah.
Rebels are appreciated and tolerated here, you know, they're rewarded. Exactly.
Yeah.
It's the whole Maverick thing. I think, you know,
as long as America still can celebrate Mavericks and tolerate,
not just tolerate them, but actually celebrate them. Yeah. We're,
we're gonna be fine. Right. Yeah. And hopefully.
Hopefully the thing is that if it exists the way it exists in other parts of the
world, it can exist like that here.
Like the worst cases of human behavior. When you see,
you know,
any form of dictatorship or control or propaganda or control
by the state or by industry,
that's stuff that you see in other countries is human beings in 2020. Right?
I mean, our, we would like to think that our constitution,
bill of rights and all of our ideals and what this country was founded on is
gonna keep it from deteriorating like that. And most likely it will.
But the reality is those people in Iraq are human beings in
2020.
And they're living in a completely different way than we're living right now at
the same, on the same timeline, right. Because things did not go well there.
And they're stuck in this horrible situation where they are controlled
by these religious finance addicts and they are stuck and there's not a lot
that they can do other than escape.